SECRET TRUSTS
A secret trust is a testamentary disposition whereby property is left to a person (the legatee: receiving under a will) under a will on the understanding that they will hold the property as trustee for the benefit of beneficiaries who are not named in the will. It is a clandestine arrangement between a testator and a trustee which operates outside the terms of the will.
Certain formalities are necessary for the creation of lifetime trusts of, for instance, land and testamentary dispositions. A trust of land must be evidenced by writing and all testamentary dispositions must be in writing, signed by the testator in the presence of two or more witnesses.  Sec 9 of the Will Act 1837, provides that no will shall be valid unless,
(a)	it is in writing, and signed by the testator, or by some other person in his presence and by his direction; and
(b) it appears that the testator intended by his signature to give effect to the will; and
(c) the signature is made or acknowledged by the testator in the presence of two or more witnesses present at the same time; and
(d) each witness either -
  (i) attests and signs the will; or
  (ii) acknowledges his signature, in the presence of the testator (but not necessarily in the presence of any other witnesses)
TESTAMENTARY 
For a gift to be testamentary it must be revocable and ambulatory! Meaning a trust/ gift will be valid the day it is made but it will only take effect upon the testator’s death. Thus a ST and a will both will be valid the day they are created but will not take effect immediately but on the death of the testator. Also a testamentary gift can be amended anytime before the death of the testator, by him, but it has to be in writing, signed and witnessed in compliance with s. 20 of WA 1837. A document that amends a will in part is called a codicil and becomes a part of the testator’s whole will.
An intervivos gift/trust on the other hand comes to effect the day it is created.  An intervivos trust can also be revocable but it is not ambulatory. Moreover a gift which gives the donee an interest on the donor’s death is not always testamentary, for it to be one it must be both revocable and ambulatory!!
Another distinguishing feature of a testamentary gift is that if the intended legatee predeceases the testator then the gift lapses, meaning it comes to an end! However an inter vivos gift taking effect on the date of creation will entitle the donee’s estate to the gift!
TYPES OF SECRET TRUSTS
There are two main types of secret trusts, fully secret and half secret trusts. In a fully secret trust the ‘will’ makes no mention of the trust whereas in a half secret trust the declaration of a trust is mentioned in the will, minus the terms of the trust. In both kinds of trusts beneficiaries are not known on the face of the will. For example; 
A appears to take absolutely under B’s will but in fact A has informally agreed to hold the property on trust for C = fully secret trust. 
My property to B on trust as communicated to him = half secret trust. 
The problem is that the terms of secret trusts are not expressed in a form which is compatible with the provisions of the 1837 Act, which were based on the long-standing principles of Statute of Frauds. Moreover equity has enforced these trusts in order to give effect to the settlor’s true intentions contrary to the Wills Act. Thus the question is whether the enforcement of ST infringes the Wills Act; or whether there is a recognised doctrine which allows ST to be enforced despite the Wills Act. 
Note: also possible to make a ST without a will, the intestate successor can be told by the testator to keep the property on trust for a third party. 
PROOF OF SECRET TRUSTS
Re Snowden: testatrix after making various particular gifts left the residue of her estate to her brother, he ‘knowing her wishes’ for the money. The brother died six days after her. The question before the courts was whether on insufficient evidence a trust was undertaken by him. Megarry VC held that there was only a moral obligation imposed by the Testator not a legal one thus no secret trust. The standard of proof, despite the doctrinal basis of the secret trust being the prevention of fraud, was the usual civil standard of balance of probabilities (more likely than not) required to prove an ordinary trust.  

JUSTIFICATIONS FOR ENFORCING ST NOTWITHSATNDING WA’ 1837
A strict application of the 1837 Act makes non compliance with it illegal and therefore a ST would always fail and the property will fall into the hands of the legatee and defeat the intentions of the S. However Mathews, considering the history of Statute of Frauds and S.9, had an interesting argument he said that s.9 only requires transfer of legal title to be in writing but not testamentary trusts themselves. Therefore the concept of ST as per his theory becomes completely redundant as any testamentary gift, be it oral or written, will be valid and can be proved by parol evidence. However as much as his theory has merits it goes without saying that ST need to comply with S.9 because if it was not so the courts would not have propounded the various theories that they have to justify enforcement and validity of ST based on oral evidence. The modern enforcement of ST is such that the testator validly created/declared a trust during his lifetime and the trust became constituted by the vesting of the property in the legatee/trustee on his death! However this was not the one that was relied on historically. The courts found the justification in not complying with the Wills Act in the doctrine of fraud.
•	Fraud Theory 
It would be fraudulent if the legatee were to take beneficially in the circumstances where the testator actually asked him to do otherwise. In McCormick V Grogan, the testator left all his property to his friend Grogan. On his deathbed he told Grogan that he had left all his property in his will to him and he also told him where to find the will and the letter with it. There was no further communication b/w the 2. The letter detailed a large number of gifts in pursuit of which G had to apply money although most of the money was left to G. G did not make all of the gifts and one non-recipient M declared G to be a trustee. The HL refused to do so and they put forth definition of fraud which would result in equity stepping in; it was held in McCormick that where the defendant fraudulently refuses to comply with the agreement, upon which the owner relied, when he receives the property on the owner’s death, will constitute fraud. This was the approach adopted by the courts. This conception of fraud is also based on the principles propounded by the statute of frauds and R V B where it was held that a statute cannot be used as an instrument of fraud. Therefore a legatee who agrees to hold as a secret trustee cannot later rely on s.9 and take the property absolutely; such an act on his part will constitute fraud!
It was held in Re Gardner that ‘a breach of trust or fraud is committed when you deal with the money contrary to the terms on which you took it’. The only fraud necessary is the legatee’s refusal to carry out his agreement with the testator, the agreement being to carry out an informal testamentary disposition so that the testator can bypass the provisions of the Wills Act. 
However the issue that we face in justifying the fraud theory is that when in HST the existence of a trust is mentioned in the will how is it possible for the legatee/ST to commit fraud? It is perfectly possible for a legatee in a FST to take beneficially against the wishes of the testator but not possible where he has been mentioned to be a T in the will. Therefore in Blackwell V Blackwell the HL adopted a new variation of fraud it was held that the D’s fraud is not falsely to induce the testator to make a gift in his favour nor to refuse to comply with his promise to the testator but to cheat the testator’s intended donees of their intended benefits, the fraud is one on the secret B’s! This is known as the expanded fraud theory. But for this to apply to HST it must also be shown that the trust in question is a valid one!! Only if it is a valid trust can fraud against the beneficiaries be committed, thus to apply this theory we first need to prove that the instrument i.e. HST, is in fact valid! Beneficiaries will only get this title if the trust is upheld as a valid one!
The courts have therefore applied the fraud theory in order to enforce oral secret trusts and not comply with the provisions of the 1837 Act. It must be borne in mind that the courts are said to impose a CT by virtue of fraud theory as there is no evidence of the trust itself. 
Equity’s enforcement of ST has allowed testator to make informal oral testamentary disposition, despite the requirements of the 1837 Act.  The only fraud that is now necessary is the legatee’s refusal to carry out T’s wishes!! But the real question is are we, on the basis of this fraud theory, actually eradicating fraud and not letting the legatee use statute as an engine of fraud or does the ‘ghost of fraudulent behaviour in the area of ST still linger’ (Rickett)? It would not be wrong to say that we face the same problem as we did with R V B and non compliance with 53 1 b: the evidence that in itself is unauthentic cannot be used for validating and enforcing oral testamentary trusts!! Secondly fraud being the threshold to bypass Wills Act is making leeway for further fraud being committed; who is to prove fraud? How do we know that the secret beneficiary is not the one who is being fraudulent?
•	Alternative theory
An alternative theory was also propounded by the HL in Cullen v AG for Ireland and it was adopted by Viscount Summer and Lord Warrington in Blackwell. It was held that the enforcement of HST was justified by saying that the intention of the testator was clear and that it was communicated to and acquiesced in by the legatee. Therefore when one acquiesces to the wishes of the testator it ‘removes the matter from the provision of the WA’1837 and brings it within the law of trusts’.  The trustee’s acceptance of his personal obligations is the essential feature! 
NOTE: both the expanded fraud theory and the alternative theory were propounded to resolve the problem of HST and fraud theory, but these attempts of the courts have been futile. 
•	‘Dehors’ (outside) the Wills Theory
This theory simply suggests that once the trustee has been communicated his duties and he has accepted, an inter vivos trust is created by the legatee which is not constituted until the death of the testator, through his will. Therefore it would not be wrong to say that secret trusts arise outside the will! 
It is rightly argued that the theory should be called the ‘outside the Wills Act’ theory, because it is clear that any informal testamentary disposition would not be a part of the will because if it was a formal disposition it would either BE the will or be a PART of it. That being said it is a fact that both the ST’s in question arise outside the will, fully in the case of FST and in part where HST is involved!! 
Penner says “it is a cloak to cover up the embarrassment that equity has got itself into with its willingness to flout the Wills Act.”
It is said that the reason why this theory was put forward was that a fraud theory fits in well with FST and such a trust will be enforced however it does not cater to HST and a testator who has, to the extent that he can, followed the 1837 Act should not be put in a worse off position than the one who did not comply with it; as Viscount Sumner has said ‘why should equity, over a mere matter of words, give effect to them in one case and frustrate them in another?’ Therefore the reason behind this theory, one can assume, is to cater to HST and to play down the ambiguity left behind by the fraud theory! 
This theory is also accused of creating an unwanted dichotomy b/w wills and trusts. The fact is that these trusts if not all most of them arise out of a will and are testamentary in nature thus how can you hold them to be poles apart when in fact they are inter related! It is not just ST but it is very common to find wills mentioning a trust or declaring a trust! Moreover it has given wills a very narrow interpretation as a formal document; it should be borne in mind that this is not what the statute means by a will and secondly prior to these acts of 1677 and 1837 wills were created orally. Will in the statute is being referred to the totality of the testator’s wishes and ST is without any doubt a testamentary disposition.
Lastly making acceptance a criterion under this theory is giving too much emphasis to acceptance by T, which has not been given by the law!! (Argue)
In re Gardner an alternative version of this theory was put forward by Romer J. In his opinion it is the secret trustee who declares an intervivos trust of the property he shall receive under the will. This is even more absurd as it is simply a declaration of a future intention. He cannot do any such thing unless he has the property so both the intention and the property are in the future. This decision is questionable on many grounds and is not held to be good law!
Despite the loopholes certain decisions of the court depend upon it, for instance in Re Young the Court did not apply s. 15 of the 1837 Act and held that the beneficiary did not take under the will. As per s. 15 of the Act any beneficial devise to an attesting witness or an attesting witness’s spouse shall be void. In this case the secret beneficiary was also a witness to the will.
Most important of all is that this theory has not been able to eradicate the problem of unauthentic oral evidence that is being used by the courts to enforce oral evidence.
It can be said that as a matter of policy an exception is favoured where the intention of the testator is clear and is only opposed by a formality requirement which was there to establish it (intention). But how do we know that there was in fact an intention (as far as FST are concerned).
FURTHER FACTORS THAT NEED TO BE CONSIDERED FOR VALIDITY
•	Fully Secret Trusts
The general rule for communication and subsequent acceptance of the trust is that the trustee must accept any time before the execution of the will (Re Bryes). If the testator discloses to the trustee the fact that he intends to hold the legacy on trust, but does not disclose the terms of the trust before his death the legatee will hold on a RT for the testator’s estate; this imposition of a RT will prevent the unjust enrichment of the legatee.
Re Boyes a legacy was given to the testator’s solicitor who had undertaken to hold the property according to directions which he would receive by letter. The letter was found only after the death. The court held that there was a RT in favour of the estate, even though the solicitor was accepting his role as a trustee. It was held that the essence of all these decisions is that the devisee or legatee accepts a particular trust which thereupon becomes binding upon him, and which it would be fraud in him not to carry into effect. The decision is also based on the fact that the trustee was not given the option to refuse to act under the trust.
Therefore as far as FST is concerned the communication must be before the testator’s death and it may be oral or written. 
Re Keen ‘a ship which sails under sealed orders, is sailing under orders though the exact terms are not ascertained by the captain till later’. Therefore a sealed envelope with the legatee to be opened after the testator’s death is sufficient communication, however the legatee’s knowledge of what is said in the letter is of utmost importance!
A testator must not only communicate the trust terms but also the identity of the property to be held on trust. 
Where a testamentary gift is made to two or more persons as TIC and secret trusts are communicated to some of them then only those who are aware of the ST i.e. who have been communicated the trust are bound, the others take beneficially. (Tee V Ferri and Re Stead)
However where they receive as joint tenants the law differs where communication is made before the will and where it is made after the will but before the testator’s death. If the trust is communicated before the will then all the join tenants are bound (Re Young; Jones V Badley) but where the latter is the case then only those who have accepted the trust are bound by it (Moss V Cooper).
•	Half Secret Trusts
The rule regarding acceptance is that it must be made before the execution of the will (Re Keen). This rule has been subjected to a lot of criticism but the justification provided is that any changes that are made in the will will be brought to the notice of the legatee/ST. 
Secondly there are no distinct rules in HST as compared to FST, for communication to more than one legatee, however it is said that the STee’s take as join tenants thus communication will need to be before the execution of the will. But there is no authority for this. 
PRE DECEASE OF THE SB
As a general rule if the beneficiary of a trust dies before the settlor the trust lapses, thus no reason why the law for ST should be any different. However in Re Gardner (No. 2) Justice Romer held that at the time of death there was an inter vivos trust in favour of the SB. Thus on the death of SB the property should go to his estate and so it went. But this decision is questionable on many grounds.

PRE DECEASE OF THE ST (ee)
‘A court will not allow a trust to fail for lack of a trustee’, this maxim is not that easily applicable in the case of ST. In ST the terms of the trust are a secret and it is difficult for the courts to a) find a trust and b) bind a new trustee by the terms which are not known to them. Thus it will not be very easy to appoint a new trustee. This inherent difficulty in the law may lead to the application of doctrine of lapse however that is not a general rule. 
Re Maddock – if a FS trustee predeceases the testator the legacy will lapse and ST will fail for lack of SM (obiter). This is an example of rules of probate being applied to the vesting of the legacy!
However as far as HST is concerned a new trustee can be appointed however it will be difficult to execute the trust!
DICLAIMER BY THE ST (ee)
Where a person nominated as a trustee declines to act, the courts will appoint another to act in his place. So in a HST if trustee declines the courts will appoint a new trustee and the ST will not fail. But it seems that a FST will fail if such a disclaimer is made by the ST but where the disclaimer was to benefit from the property as a residuary beneficiary then a CT will be imposed. However in Re Maddock it was held that where a FST (ee) disclaims for no other benefit the trust will lapse as rules of probate will apply however in Blackwell V Blackwell it was held that the courts would intervene to prevent the trustee from destroying a completely constituted trust by disclaiming his office!
WITNESSING BY THE SB
Sec 15 WA’ 1837 – if the gift is being made to a witness attesting or the spouse of the witness attesting, then it is void. However in Re Young on the basis of the outside the will theory the courts did not apply this provision and held the disposition to be valid.
WITNESSING BY ST
In an ordinary trust or HST witnessing the will by a trustee does not affect anything. However the problem comes about in FST where the legatee takes absolutely on the face of the will but is in fact a ST. Thus his witnessing will make the will void as it will be in defiance of the WA’37.
Are STs constructive or express?!
Re Bailee clearly suggests that at least HST are express trusts however many commentators argue that FST are CT. However it must be noted that in both cases testator clearly intends to create a trustee-beneficiary r/ship.  This view is further strengthened on the basis of the dehors the will theory. Also Oakley clearly states that all ST are express trusts and so they must comply with section 53 (1) of the LPA 1925.
